feat: Observe LLM metrics with Grafana (#2522)
Kong/developer.konghq.com: app/_how-tos/visualize-llm-metrics-with-grafana.md

---
title: "Visualize LLM traffic with Prometheus and Grafana"
content_type: how_to
related_resources:
  - text: AI Gateway
    url: /ai-gateway/
  - text: AI Proxy Advanced
    url: /plugins/ai-proxy-advanced/
  - text: Prometheus plugin
    url: /plugins/prometheus/
  - text: Monitor AI metrics
    url: /ai-gateway/monitor-ai-llm-metrics/

description: Learn how to monitor LLM traffic and visualize AI metrics in Grafana using the AI Proxy Advanced and Prometheus plugins in {{ site.base_gateway }}.

products:
  - gateway
  - ai-gateway

works_on:

>   - on-prem

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - on-prem
  - konnect
```

min_version:
  gateway: '3.11'

plugins:
  - ai-proxy-advanced
  - prometheus

entities:
  - service
  - route
  - plugin

tags:
  - ai
  - observability
  - prometheus
  - grafana

tldr:
  q: How can I visualize LLM traffic metrics in Kong AI Gateway?
  a: |
    Enable the AI Proxy Advanced plugin to collect detailed request and model statistics. Then configure the Prometheus plugin to expose these metrics for scraping. Finally, connect Grafana to visualize model performance, usage trends, and traffic distribution in real time.

tools:
  - deck

prereqs:

>   inline:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  konnect:
    - name: KONG_STATUS_LISTEN
      value: '0.0.0.0:8100'
  inline:
```
This one is required for Konnect with Prometheus. It listens for Prometheus on a different port that we have to specify when setting up the DP.

              provider: openai
              name: gpt-4.1
              options:
                max_tokens: 512
                temperature: 1.0
                input_cost: 0.75
                output_cost: 0.75
            route_type: llm/v1/chat
            logging:
              log_payloads: true
              log_statistics: true
            auth:
              header_name: Authorization
              header_value: Bearer ${openai_api_key}
            weight: 50
          - model:
              provider: mistral
              name: mistral-tiny
              options:
                mistral_format: openai
                upstream_url: https://api.mistral.ai/v1/chat/completions
                input_cost: 0.25
                output_cost: 0.25
            route_type: llm/v1/chat
            logging:
              log_payloads: true
              log_statistics: true
            auth:
              header_name: Authorization
              header_value: Bearer ${mistral_api_key}
            weight: 50
variables:
  openai_api_key:
    value: $OPENAI_API_KEY
  mistral_api_key:
    value: $MISTRAL_API_KEY
{% endentity_examples %}

## Enable the Prometheus plugin

> Before you configure Prometheus, enable the [Prometheus plugin](/plugins/prometheus/) on {{site.base_gateway}}. In this example, we’ve enabled two types of metrics: status code metrics, and AI metrics which expose detailed performance and usage data for AI-related requests:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before you configure Prometheus, enable the [Prometheus plugin](/plugins/prometheus/) on {{site.base_gateway}}. In this example, we’ve enabled two types of metrics: status code metrics, and AI metrics which expose detailed performance and usage data for AI-related requests.
```

{% entity_examples %}
entities:
  plugins:
    - name: prometheus
      config:
        status_code_metrics: true
        ai_metrics: true
        bandwidth_metrics: true
        latency_metrics: true
        upstream_health_metrics: true
{% endentity_examples %}

## Configure Prometheus

Create a `prometheus.yml` file:

```sh
touch prometheus.yml
```

Now, add the following to the `prometheus.yml` file to configure Prometheus to scrape {{site.base_gateway}} metrics:

```yaml
scrape_configs:
 - job_name: 'kong'
   scrape_interval: 5s
   static_configs:
     - targets: ['kong-quickstart-gateway:8001']
```
{: data-deployment-topology="on-prem" }

```yaml
scrape_configs:
 - job_name: 'kong'
   scrape_interval: 5s
   static_configs:
     - targets: ['kong-quickstart-gateway:8100']

> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```
{: data-deployment-topology="konnect" }

````

Now, run a Prometheus server, and pass it the configuration file created in the previous step:

```sh
docker run -d --name kong-quickstart-prometheus \
  --network=kong-quickstart-net -p 9090:9090 \
  -v $(PWD)/prometheus.yml:/etc/prometheus/prometheus.yml \
  prom/prometheus:latest
```

Prometheus will begin to scrape metrics data from Kong AI Gateway.

> ## Validate Prometheus configuration
> 
> You can validate that the plugin is collecting metrics by generating traffic to the example service.
> 
> Run the following to query the collected `kong_ai_llm_requests_total` metric data:
> 
> ```sh
> curl -s 'localhost:9090/api/v1/query?query=kong_ai_llm_requests_total'
> ```
> 
> This should return the following response:
> 
> ```text
> {"status":"success","data":{"resultType":"vector","result":[{"metric":{"__name__":"kong_ai_llm_requests_total","ai_model":"gpt-4.1","ai_provider":"openai","instance":"kong-quickstart-gateway:8001","job":"kong","workspace":"default"},"value":[1754897018.422,"2"]},{"metric":{"__name__":"kong_ai_llm_requests_total","ai_model":"mistral-tiny","ai_provider":"mistral","instance":"kong-quickstart-gateway:8001","job":"kong","workspace":"default"},"value":[1754897018.422,"1"]}]}}%
> ```
> {: .no-copy-code }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Since we generate traffic later and currently this example returns nothing (since no traffic is generated yet), I think we can just remove it.

## Configure Grafana dashboard

> ### Step 1: Add Prometheus Data Source

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Add Prometheus data source
```

> 1. In the Grafana UI, go to **Connections** > **Data Sources**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In the Grafana UI, go to **Connections** > **Data Sources**. If you're using the Grafana setup from the [prerequisites](/how-to/visualize-llm-metrics-with-grafana/#grafana), you can access the UI at [http://localhost:3000/](http://localhost:3000/).
```

2. Click **Add data source**.
3. Select **Prometheus** from the list.

> 4. In the **Connection > Prometheus server URL** field, enter: `http://host.docker.internal:9090`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. In the **Prometheus server URL** field, enter: `http://host.docker.internal:9090`.
```

5. Scroll down to the bottom of the page and click **Save & test** to verify the connection. If successful, you'll see the following message:
  ```text
  Successfully queried the Prometheus API.
  ```

> ### Step 2: Import Dashboard

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Import Dashboard
```

> 1. In the Grafana UI, navigate to **Dashboards** > **New** > **Import**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In the Grafana UI, navigate to **Dashboards**.
1. Select "Import" from the **New** dropdown menu.
```

> 2. In the **Import via grafana.com** field, enter the dashboard ID: `21162`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Enter `21162` in the **Find and import dashboards for common applications** field.
1. Click **Load**.
```

> 3. In the **Prometheus** dropdown, select the Prometheus data source you created in Step 1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. In the **Prometheus** dropdown, select the Prometheus data source you created previously.
```

3. Click **Import**.

## View Grafana configuration

> Now, we can generate additional traffic by running the following CURL request:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, we can generate traffic by running the following CURL request:
```

```bash
for i in {1..5}; do
  echo -n "Request #$i — Model: "
  curl -s -X POST "http://localhost:8000/anything" \
    -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
    --data '{
      "messages": [
        {
          "role": "user",
          "content": "Hello sir!"
        }
      ]
    }' | jq -r '.model'
  sleep 10
done
```

> Once finished, you'll see in the output something like this and notice that the requested were routed to different models:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once it's finished, you'll see something like the following in the output. Notice that the requests were routed to different models based on the load balancing you configured earlier:
```

```text
Request #1 — Model: gpt-4.1-2025-04-14
Request #2 — Model: mistral-tiny
Request #3 — Model: mistral-tiny
Request #4 — Model: mistral-tiny
Request #5 — Model: gpt-4.1-2025-04-14
```
{: .no-copy-code }

## View metrics in Grafana

> Now we can see that traffic visualized in the Grafana dashboard:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now you can visualize that traffic in the Grafana dashboard.
```

1. Open Grafana in your browser at [http://localhost:3000](http://localhost:3000).

> 1. Navigate to **Dashboards** and open the **Kong CX AI** dashboard you imported earlier.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Navigate to **Dashboards** in the sidebar.
1. Click the **Kong CX AI** dashboard you imported earlier.
```

> 1. You should see, among other panels:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. You should see the following:
```

>    - **AI Total Request** — total request count and breakdown by provider.
>    - **Tokens consumption** — counts for `completion_tokens`, `prompt_tokens`, and `total_tokens`.
>    - **Cost AI Request** — estimated cost of AI requests (shown if `input_costs` and `output_costs` are configured).
>    - **DB Vector** — vector database request metrics (shown if `vector_db` is enabled).
>    - **AI Requests Details** — timeline of recent AI requests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - **AI Total Request**: Total request count and breakdown by provider.
   - **Tokens consumption*: Counts for `completion_tokens`, `prompt_tokens`, and `total_tokens`.
   - **Cost AI Request**: Estimated cost of AI requests (shown if `input_costs` and `output_costs` are configured).
   - **DB Vector**: Vector database request metrics (shown if `vector_db` is enabled).
   - **AI Requests Details**: Timeline of recent AI requests.
```

> The visualized metrics in Grafana will look similar to the example dashboard shown above:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The visualized metrics in Grafana will look similar to this example dashboard:
```

## View metrics in Grafana

Now you can visualize that traffic in the Grafana dashboard.

1. Open Grafana in your browser at [http://localhost:3000](http://localhost:3000).
1. Navigate to **Dashboards** in the sidebar.
1. Click the **Kong CX AI** dashboard you imported earlier.
1. You should see the following:
   - **AI Total Request**: Total request count and breakdown by provider.

>    - **Tokens consumption*: Counts for `completion_tokens`, `prompt_tokens`, and `total_tokens`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - **Tokens consumption**: Counts for `completion_tokens`, `prompt_tokens`, and `total_tokens`.
```
